



TLS Working Group                                           B. McMillion
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Informational                                D. O'Brien
Expires: 31 December 2025                                     Google LLC
                                                              D. Jackson
                                                                 Mozilla
                                                            29 June 2025


            Reliable Transparency and Revocation Mechanisms
             draft-mcmillion-transparency-revocation-latest

Abstract

   This document describes reliable mechanisms for the publication and
   revocation of Transport Layer Security (TLS) certificates.  This
   reliability takes several forms.  First, it provides browsers a
   strong guarantee that all certificates they accept are truly
   published and unrevoked at the time they're accepted.  Second, it
   allows operators to monitor for mis-issuances related to their
   websites in a highly efficient way without relying on third-party
   services.  Third, it provides a high degree of operational redundancy
   to minimize the risk of cascading outages.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://Bren2010.github.io/draft-transparency-revocation/draft-
   mcmillion-transparency-revocation.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   mcmillion-transparency-revocation/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/Bren2010/draft-transparency-revocation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 December 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Architecture
     3.1.  Requirements
     3.2.  Discussion
     3.3.  Summary
   4.  Transparency Log
     4.1.  Subtree Inclusion Proofs
     4.2.  Tree Heads
   5.  TLS Extension
     5.1.  ClientHello
     5.2.  ServerHello
     5.3.  Certificate
   6.  Transparency Log Endpoints
     6.1.  Get Tree
     6.2.  Add Chain
     6.3.  Refresh Proof
     6.4.  Issue Token
     6.5.  Get Certificates
     6.6.  Get Subdomains
     6.7.  Add Revocation
     6.8.  Get Revocations
   7.  Extended Resolution Mechanisms
     7.1.  Background Requests
     7.2.  Oblivious Third Party
     7.3.  Final Reporting
   8.  Operational Considerations
     8.1.  Client State
     8.2.  Server Behavior
     8.3.  Handling Forks
   9.  Certificate Authority
     9.1.  Poison Extension
   10. Performance Considerations
     10.1.  Transparency Log
     10.2.  TLS Server
   11. Security Considerations
     11.1.  ClientHello Extension
     11.2.  Downgrade Prevention
   12. IANA Considerations
   13. References
     13.1.  Normative References
     13.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Certificate Transparency (CT) ecosystem created by [RFC6962] has
   been immensely valuable to security on the internet.  However,
   shortcomings in the design have become apparent over time:

   The security that CT provides to verifiers is based on an assumption
   of non-collusion between multiple parties.  Historically, this
   assumption has been challenging to maintain, as it degrades quickly
   without active management.  The compromise of a single Transparency
   Log or the unexpected acquisition of a single business is often
   sufficient to allow the possibility of undetectable mis-issued
   certificates.  This is compounded by the fact that multiple parties
   in the CT ecosystem play multiple roles (such as Certificate
   Authorities that are also Transparency Log operators), which makes
   reasoning about the possibility of collusion even more tricky.

   It is also becoming far too expensive to both operate a CT log and to
   monitor CT logs.  Logs are required to serve their entire contents to
   anyone on the internet, which consumes a significant amount of
   outbound bandwidth.  Similarly, monitoring certificate issuance in CT
   requires downloading the entire contents of all logs, which is
   several terabytes of data at minimum.  The total bandwidth costs of
   the CT ecosystem scale linearly in the number of certificates issued,
   the number of logs active, and the number of interested monitors.

   One of the primary motivations for publishing TLS certificates is to
   allow site operators to identify and revoke those certificates which
   are mis-issued.  However, revocation systems have historically been
   plagued by a requirement to "fail open".  That is, revocation checks
   would stop being enforced in certain (often, easily engineered)
   scenarios.  For example, clients using OCSP must typically fail open
   in the event the OCSP server is unreachable.  Alternatives like OCSP
   Must-Staple [RFC7633] were designed to close this loophole, but have
   been stymied by lack of support in popular web servers.

   More recent alternatives like CRLSets [CRLSets], CRLite [CRLite], and
   Clubcards [Clubcards] provide fail-closed revocation checks to
   clients, but are unstandardized, rely on trusting the server operator
   (who is typically a client software vendor, rather than a CA) and
   offer limited transparency properties.

   This motivates a need for a new system of publishing certificates
   that's resistant to collusion and dramatically more efficient to
   operate, and a need for a new system of revoking certificates that
   can be consistently enforced.

   Since the initial deployment of Certificate Transparency in 2013,
   there has been a considerable body of research published on
   transparency systems.  In recent years, Key Transparency systems have
   been deployed by Apple [AppleKT], Meta [MetaKT], and ProtonMail
   [ProtonKT].  These systems not only provide stronger security
   properties, but also support transparent revocation, and also scale
   with less bandwidth costs.

   Key Transparency is being standardized in the KeyTrans IETF WG
   [KeyTransWG].  This document describes how a similar design as the
   one being considered in the KeyTrans WG could be applied to TLS in
   order to provide stronger security properties whilst also reducing
   the TLS handshake size.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Architecture

   The system has several roles, which we describe in more detail below.
   Parties are allowed to assume multiple roles.

   *Certificate Authority:*  A service that performs domain-control
      validation and authenticates certificates and revocations.

   *Transparency Log:*  A service that provides an append-only,
      publicly-auditable log of certificates and revocations issued by a
      wide range of Certificate Authorities.

   *Site Operator:*  The individual or organization responsible for
      operating and maintaining a website, as identified by a set of
      domain names or IP addresses.

   *User Agent:*  A software application, typically but not necessarily
      a web browser, that acts on behalf of a user to access and
      interact with websites.

3.1.  Requirements

   The following baseline requirements for the system are as follows:

   1.  For a certificate to be mis-issued and not eventually published:
       two trusted parties must collude to misbehave and all User Agents
       that observed the certificate must be stateless.

   2.  For a User Agent to accept a revoked certificate and this not be
       eventually detected: one trusted party must misbehave and all
       User Agents that accepted the certificate must be stateless.

   3.  It must be reasonably efficient for Site Operators to audit all
       trusted Certificate Authorities for mis-issuances affecting their
       domain names and IP addresses.

   4.  It must not be possible for a third-party service's outage to
       cause an outage for a Site Operator, other than how it could in
       the web PKI as it exists today.

   5.  User Agents must be able to connect to a server without having
       immediate connectivity to third-party services.

   6.  The domain names and/or IP addresses of websites visited by a
       User Agent must not be leaked, other than how they are in the web
       PKI as it exists today.

   7.  The system must be reasonable for non-browser User Agents to
       deploy.

   8.  The system must have a reasonable path to scale to an indefinite
       number of Site Operators and User Agents.

   These requirements and their main consequences are discussed in more
   detail in the following subsection.

3.2.  Discussion

   *Transparency must support stateful verification.* The fundamental
   goal of any transparency system is to ensure that data shown to one
   participant is equally visible to any other participant.
   Transparency systems that achieve this by relying solely on stateless
   verification are more accurately referred to as "co-signing" schemes.
   This is because the security of these systems reduces solely to
   successful verification of the co-signers' signatures on a claim that
   some data is properly published, and ultimately to an assumption that
   the co-signers are not colluding to suppress the data.

   In the web PKI, the co-signers in such a system would be a
   Certificate Authority and one or more Transparency Logs.  The diverse
   and rapidly changing nature of the web makes collusion between
   participants easy to achieve and difficult to detect.  Without a
   technical mechanism to detect or prevent collusion, it can be
   covertly achieved and maintained for very long periods of time.

   The typical solution to this problem is to construct the system such
   that a larger number of co-signers need to collude to succeed in
   launching an attack.  However, requiring that a large number of
   signatures from different co-signers be presented in every TLS
   handshake would easily bloat the handshake to an unacceptable degree.
   This is especially true when the signatures are required to come from
   post-quantum signature schemes, given that they're much larger than
   their classical alternatives.

   While the system described in this document supports stateless
   verification, which is secure as long as there's no collusion between
   trusted parties, it also provides stateful verification.  Stateful
   verification allows verifiers to detect violations of the system's
   core security guarantees, that all certificates they accept are
   published and unrevoked, regardless of any amount of collusion by
   trusted parties.  This obviates the need for having a large number of
   co-signers, allowing TLS handshakes to remain small and providing the
   broader ecosystem (including stateless verifiers) with a reliable
   early warning system for misbehavior by trusted parties.

   *Servers must provide proof directly to clients that their
   certificate satisfies transparency requirements and isn't revoked.*
   If proof of transparency and non-revocation isn't provided by the
   server, it must be fetched from one or more third-party services.
   The primary issue with this is that it ties the server's global
   availability to the global availability of these third-party
   services, for which the server operator has no way to preempt or
   resolve deficiencies.  Proposals for transparency and revocation that
   rely on connectivity to third-party services have historically been
   required to "fail open", meaning that if the third-party service is
   inaccessible for too long, then the client stops enforcing these
   security properties altogether.  Failing open is incompatible with
   requirements 1 and 2 because it introduces the possibility that a
   client might accept an unpublished or revoked certificate without
   explicit misbehavior by a trusted party.

   A second issue is that, since we're primarily interested in
   describing a system that works equally well regardless of the
   client's software vendor (requirement 7), such a service would
   reasonably be prohibited from restricting access to itself.  It would
   receive regular requests from all internet-connected devices,
   creating significant scaling and centralization concerns.

   *Servers must refresh their certificates regularly and
   automatically.* This is a direct consequence of the decision that
   servers must be responsible for providing clients proof that their
   certificates are not revoked.  If a server is not required to refresh
   its certificate, it can arbitrarily delay the client from learning
   about changes in the certificate's revocation status.  This would be
   incompatible with requirement 2, since servers are not considered
   trusted parties and should not be capable of undermining revocation
   on their own.

   *Revocation must be provided by the transparency system.* A CA can
   initiate revocation either by declining to sign new statements
   related to a certificate (for example, by not renewing a short-lived
   certificate or not creating an OCSP staple), or by signing a new
   "statement of revocation" for the certificate.

   In the case where CAs initiate revocation by signing a new "statement
   of revocation", proving that a certificate is not revoked consists of
   proving that such a statement does not exist.  Proving that a
   statement does not exist requires exhaustive knowledge of all such
   statements.  Any method of conveying this exhaustive knowledge, if it
   is not a transparency system, admits the possibility of split-view
   attacks which are not eventually detected.  Split-view attacks in
   this context would allow a CA to mis-issue a certificate, claim to
   revoke it, and then maintain the certificate's utility by presenting
   different views of its revocation status to attack victims than to
   other participants.  The possibility of such a split-view attack
   would violate requirement 2, as it would not be after-the-fact
   detectable.  More practically though, it would render revocation
   fundamentally insufficient for correcting mis-issuance and would
   create a need for a second (more effective) revocation mechanism.

   In the case where CAs initiate revocation by declining to sign new
   statements, this makes the CA a single point-of-failure for websites
   relying on it.  A prolonged CA outage would have the effect of
   revoking all certificates and causing a cascading outage, violating
   requirement 4.  Proposals for revocation that fall into this category
   have historically mitigated this risk by providing very slow
   revocation, bounded by the longest conceivable outage that a CA may
   have (typically at least one week).  Additionally, it's clear that
   the same potential for split-view attacks would still exist, as
   discussed above.

   When specifically considering short-lived certificates as an approach
   to revocation, effectiveness depends on whether or not *all*
   certificates in the PKI are required to be short-lived.  If clients
   enforce that all certificates are short-lived, and issuance is
   transparent, then revocation is provided by the transparency system
   as claimed.  If certificates may be issued with longer lifespans,
   then a second revocation mechanism for these certificates is
   necessary.

   All certificate lifetimes are already planned to fall from 398 days
   today to 47 days in 2029 [CertLifetimes], bringing a number of
   security and agility benefits to the ecosystem.  However, 47 days is
   still much longer than is tolerable without effective revocation.
   Although a further reduction to 7 days or 24 hours is possible in
   theory, each halving in lifetime results in doubling the issuance
   load for CAs, CT logs and monitors.  The net effect would be a ~56x
   increase in issuance rate in order to maintain the same size PKI as
   we have today.

   *Transparency Logs must implement a protocol similar to Key
   Transparency [KEYTRANS].* As stated at the beginning of this section,
   the goal of any transparency system is to ensure that data shown to
   one participant is equally visible to any other participant.  In the
   context of the web PKI, this means that a Site Operator that contacts
   all trusted Transparency Logs should come away with an exhaustive
   knowledge of all certificates that a client might be presented with
   when connecting to their servers.

   Most transparency systems require downloading the entirety of the
   log's contents to ensure that all potentially relevant entries are
   found.  This quickly becomes prohibitively expensive for all parties,
   violating requirements 3 and 8.  Currently roughly 7.5 million
   certificates are issued per day, with an average size of 3 kilobytes.
   This means that a Site Operator would need to download almost 700
   gigabytes of certificates to cover a single month of issuance.
   Outbound bandwidth typically costs between 1 to 9 cents per gigabyte,
   which means that providing this data to a single Site Operator would
   cost the Transparency Log between $6 to $60.  If even a small
   percentage of all Site Operators on the internet were to do this, it
   would create an exceptional financial and operational burden for the
   Transparency Log.

   In the existing Certificate Transparency ecosystem, because of this
   exceptional cost, Site Operators have overwhelmingly elected not to
   do this work themselves and have instead outsourced it to third-party
   monitors.  Third-party monitors represent a problematic break in the
   security guarantees of Certificate Transparency as there are no
   enforceable requirements on their behavior.  They are not audited for
   correct behavior like Certificate Authorities are, and there are no
   technical mechanisms to prevent misbehavior like a Transparency Log
   would have.

   Key Transparency systems are generally distinguished from other
   transparency systems by the fact that they augment a Transparency Log
   with additional structure to allow efficient and verifiable searches
   for specific data.  In the context of providing transparency to the
   web PKI, this would allow Site Operators to download only a small
   subset of the data in a Transparency Log and still be assured to have
   received all certificates that are relevant to them.  Due to the
   significantly reduced need for outbound bandwidth, operating such a
   Transparency Log would cost roughly one million times less than it
   would if Site Operators were required to download the log's entire
   contents.

   Transparency Logs may still choose to allow parties to download their
   entire contents.  However, this is not necessary for the protocol to
   be secure and this document doesn't prescribe a specific mechanism
   for it.  Additionally, while the protocol described in [KEYTRANS]
   could be applied directly, some optimizations and simplifications
   specific to the web PKI are provided in Section 4.

3.3.  Summary

   In summary, the system described in this document works as follows:

   *  Site Operators obtain a certificate from a Certificate Authority
      and submit it to one of many trusted Transparency Logs to obtain
      an inclusion proof.

   *  User Agents that contact the Site Operator's server over TLS
      include compact transparency-related state in their ClientHello.
      The server provides its certificate and inclusion proof
      (potentially modified based on the client's advertised state) in
      the Certificate message.  The User Agent verifies that the
      inclusion proof aligns with its state, is sufficiently recent, and
      indicates the certificate is unrevoked.

   *  As time goes on, the current inclusion proof will become stale.
      Site Operators refresh their inclusion proof by requesting a new
      one from the Transparency Log.

      -  If the first Transparency Log is offline, the Site Operator may
         failover to any of several other trusted Transparency Logs.

   *  At any time in the background, the Site Operator may query any of
      the trusted Transparency Logs and verifiably learn about all new
      certificates that have been issued affecting their domain names or
      IP addresses.  Since the Key Transparency protocol specifies a
      "correct" location for a certificate to be stored, and since User
      Agents enforce this when verifying inclusion proofs, requesting
      all certificates for a single identifier always remains highly
      efficient.

   The remainder of this document describes these steps in more detail.

4.  Transparency Log

   The data structure maintained by a Transparency Log is identical to
   the Combined Tree described in [KEYTRANS], with two exceptions: the
   search keys that are used to navigate the Prefix Tree, and the data
   committed to by each Prefix Tree leaf node, are different.

   The search key used to navigate the Prefix Tree is a function of the
   certificate's *reference identifier* in the TLS handshake.  The
   reference identifier is the domain name or IP address that the TLS
   client will verify the certificate against.  When the reference
   identifier is a domain name, the corresponding search key is the
   domain name with the components in reverse order and a trailing dot,
   meaning that "com.example.sub." would be the search key for the
   domain name "sub.example.com".  If the final component of a domain
   name is a wildcard then the wildcard is stripped, such that
   "com.example." would be the search key for "*.example.com".  The
   search key corresponding to an IPv4 addresses is the address rendered
   in dotted-decimal notation.  The search key corresponding to an IPv6
   address is the address rendered as described in option 1 of
   Section 2.2 of [RFC4291].  No VRF is used, or version counter is
   included, as they would be in [KEYTRANS].

   Rather than a privacy-preserving commitment, each Prefix Tree leaf
   contains the hash of a DomainCertificates structure:

   struct {
     opaque root[Hash.Nh];
     uint32 first_valid;
     uint32 invalid_entries<0..2^8-1>;
   } DomainCertificates;

   The root field contains the root hash of a Log Tree, which will be
   referred to as the *Certificate Subtree* to avoid confusion with the
   top-level Log Tree.  The Certificate Subtree contains all certificate
   chains that may be presented for a particular domain name or IP
   address, in the order they were logged.  The leaves of the
   Certificate Subtree are represented as SubtreeLogLeaf structures,
   used in place of LogLeaf:

   opaque Certificate<0..2^16-1>;

   struct {
     Certificate chain<0..2^8-1>;
   } SubtreeLogLeaf;

   The first_valid field contains the index of the first entry in the
   Certificate Subtree where no certificate in the chain is revoked or
   expired.  The invalid_entries field contains the list of indices of
   all entries to the right of first_valid where one or more of the
   certificates in the chain have been revoked.

   Transparency Logs SHOULD determine whether a certificate chain is
   expired by comparing the Not After field of each certificate in the
   chain to the timestamp of the Log Tree's rightmost leaf.  However,
   Transparency Logs do not have a proactive responsibility to keep the
   first_valid field updated; it is simply provided as a mechanism to
   drain invalid_entries.

   When computing PrefixLeaf, the hash of the leaf certificate's
   reference identifier is stored in the vrf_output field and the hash
   of DomainCertificates is stored in the commitment field.

4.1.  Subtree Inclusion Proofs

   It is often necessary in later parts of this document to provide
   proofs of inclusion for entries in the Certificate Subtree.  Such
   proofs are provided as follows:

   struct {
     uint32 position;
     uint32 size;
     InclusionProof inclusion;
     uint32 first_valid;
     uint32 invalid_entries<0..2^8-1>;
   } SubtreeInclusionProof;

   The position field contains the index of the leaf for which inclusion
   is being proven.  The size field contains the total number of leaves
   in the Certificate Subtree.  The proof in inclusion allows a
   recipient to recompute the root hash of the Certificate Subtree,
   given the correct value for the leaf at position.

   The first_valid and invalid_entries fields duplicate the contents of
   the DomainCertificates structure.  This allows recipients to verify
   that the leaf at position is not revoked, and also allows them to
   recompute the hash of the DomainCertificates structure stored at a
   given leaf of the Prefix Tree.

   Note that this document follows the pattern established in [KEYTRANS]
   of requiring each element of an InclusionProof to be a balanced
   subtree.  An InclusionProof may also function as a "consistency
   proof" if the recipient is known to have observed a previous version
   of the tree.

4.2.  Tree Heads

   Transparency Logs are generally expected to add only a small number
   of new entries to their Log Tree per day.  This keeps proof sizes
   small and also ensures that, when User Agents advertise having
   observed a particular tree head, there are a large number of
   potential hosts that could've conveyed the tree head.  To support
   providing inclusion proofs for new submissions quickly, Transparency
   Logs issue *provisional* tree heads.  A provisional head is, in
   essence, a work-in-progress log entry that will be added to the
   rightmost edge of the Log Tree within a bounded amount of time.

   struct {
     uint64 tree_size;
     uint32 counter;
     opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
   } ProvisionalTreeHead;

   The tree_size field is equal to the tree_size field of the last (non-
   provisional) TreeHead that was published.  The counter field starts
   at zero and is incremented by 1 for each subsequent
   ProvisionalTreeHead that's published without the creation of a new
   TreeHead.

   The signature field of both TreeHead and ProvisionalTreeHead
   structures is computed over a serialized TreeHeadTBS structure:

   struct {
     CipherSuite ciphersuite;
     opaque signature_public_key<0..2^16-1>;

     uint64 max_ahead;
     uint64 max_behind;
     optional<uint64> maximum_lifetime;
   } Configuration;

   enum {
     reserved(0),
     standard(1),
     provisional(2),
     (255)
   } TreeHeadType;

   struct {
     Configuration config;

     TreeHeadType tree_head_type;
     select (TreeHeadTBS.tree_head_type) {
       case standard:
         uint64 tree_size;
       case provisional:
         uint64 tree_size;
         uint32 counter;
         opaque prefix_root[Hash.Nh];
     };
     opaque root[Hash.Nh];
   } TreeHeadTBS;

   The max_ahead and max_behind fields contain the maximum amount of
   time in milliseconds that a tree head may be ahead of or behind the
   user's local clock without being rejected.  If the Transparency Log
   has chosen to define a maximum lifetime for log entries, per
   Section 5.2 of [KEYTRANS], this duration in milliseconds is stored in
   the maximum_lifetime field.

   When the TreeHeadTBS structure is for a provisional tree head type,
   prefix_root contains the work-in-progress root hash of the Prefix
   Tree.  This value may change further before it is added as a new
   rightmost log entry.  However, stateful clients will enforce that
   none of the certificates they observe are removed or un-revoked.

5.  TLS Extension

   The following three subsections define the ClientHello, ServerHello,
   and Certificate message portions of a TLS 1.3 extension.  This
   extension allows the host server to provide an inclusion proof for
   its certificate chain from a Transparency Log that the client
   supports.

5.1.  ClientHello

   Clients include the extension in their ClientHello to communicate
   which Transparency Logs they support and whether or not they have
   previously observed a provisional inclusion proof from the server.

   opaque BearerToken<0..2^8-1>;

   struct {
     uint16 transparency_log_id;
     TreeHeadType tree_head_type;
     select (SupportedTransparencyLog.tree_head_type) {
       case standard:
         uint64 tree_size;
     };
   } SupportedTransparencyLog;

   struct {
     SupportedTransparencyLog supported<0..2^8-1>;
     select (any supported[i].tree_head_type is provisional) {
       case true:
         BearerToken bearer_token;
     }
   } TransparencyRequest;

   The extension has type "transparency_revocation" and consists of a
   serialized TransparencyRequest structure in the extension_data field.

   Clients include an entry in the supported array for each Transparency
   Log that they support receiving inclusion proofs from, containing the
   Transparency Log's assigned unique identifier in transparency_log_id.
   The supported array MUST be sorted in ascending order by
   transparency_log_id, and each transparency_log_id MUST only be
   advertised once.

   If a client was shown a provisional inclusion proof from a
   Transparency Log in a previous connection to the server, the client
   sets tree_head_type to be provisional for that Transparency Log's
   entry in supported until one of the following conditions is met:

   1.  The client receives proof that the provisional proof was
       integrated into the subsequent log entry, or:

   2.  The timestamp of the rightmost log entry that existed in the
       provisional inclusion proof is more than 10*max_behind
       milliseconds in the past.

   For Transparency Logs where the client does not need to resolve a
   provisional inclusion proof, tree_head_type is set to standard.  The
   tree_size field is set as follows:

   *  If the client is aware of two consecutive log entries where the
      timestamp of the left log entry is greater than max_behind
      milliseconds in the past and the timestamp of the right log entry
      is less than or equal to max_behind milliseconds in the past, then
      the tree_size field is set so as to make the right log entry the
      rightmost log entry.

   *  If the client isn't aware of two log entries that meet the above
      criteria, but is aware of a log entry whose timestamp is greater
      than max_behind milliseconds in the past and less than
      10*max_behind milliseconds in the past, then the tree_size field
      is set so as to make the rightmost such log entry the rightmost
      log entry.

   *  Otherwise, the tree_size field is set to 0.

   With the first criteria, the client is aiming to advertise the oldest
   tree_size that a server could provide an inclusion proof against
   without it being expired.  If the client is unable to do this, the
   second criteria aims to advertise a tree_size that's old enough that
   it would not be de-anonymizing, but not so old that servers are
   unaware of it.

   If the tree_head_type of any SupportedTransparencyLog structure is
   set to provisional, then a bearer token is provided in bearer_token.
   The bearer token to use is provided by the server in a previous
   connection.  The same bearer token MAY be advertised in multiple
   ClientHello messages but clients SHOULD take care to minimize the
   likelihood of this.

5.2.  ServerHello

   Servers that receive a TLS 1.3 ClientHello with an extension of type
   "transparency_revocation", where the extension_data field is properly
   formed, have the option of providing an inclusion proof for their
   certificate chain.  The proof provided by the server MUST come from
   one of the Transparency Logs advertised in the client's ClientHello.
   If the server is not able to provide a proof from one of the client's
   supported Transparency Logs, it MUST respond as if the ClientHello
   extension was not advertised at all.  Servers SHOULD preferentially
   respond with an inclusion proof from one of the Transparency Logs
   that the client advertised a provisional tree head type for, provided
   that an acceptable proof is readily available.

   If and only if the server intends to provide an inclusion proof
   (provisional or not) from a Transparency Log where the client has
   advertised a provisional tree head type, it includes an extension of
   type "transparency_revocation" in its ServerHello.  The
   extension_data is the unique identifier of the Transparency Log:

   uint16 transparency_log_id;

5.3.  Certificate

   The server provides an inclusion proof for its certificate chain by
   adding an extension of type "transparency_revocation" to the first
   CertificateEntry structure in certificate_list.  The extension_data
   field is a serialized TransparencyProof structure:

   enum {
     reserved(0),
     standard(1),
     provisional(2),
     same_head(3),
     (255)
   } TransparencyProofType;

   struct {
     uint32 size
     uint32 first_valid;
     uint32 invalid_entries<0..2^8-1>;
   } SequencingProof;

   struct {
     TreeHead tree_head;
     CombinedTreeProof combined;
     select (condition) {
       case true:
         SequencingProof sequencing<1..2^8-1>;
     }
     SubtreeInclusionProof subtree<1..2^8-1>;
   } StandardProof;

   struct {
     ProvisionalTreeHead tree_head;
     CombinedTreeProof combined;
     select (condition) {
       case true:
         SequencingProof sequencing<1..2^8-1>;
     }

     PrefixProof prefix;
     SubtreeInclusionProof subtree<1..2^8-1>;
   } ProvisionalProof;

   struct {
     PrefixProof prefix;
     SubtreeInclusionProof subtree<1..2^8-1>;
   } SameHeadProof;

   struct {
     uint16 transparency_log_id;
     uint8 reference_ids<1..2^8-1>;

     TransparencyProofType proof_type;
     select(TransparencyProof.proof_type) {
       case standard:
         StandardProof proof;
       case provisional:
         ProvisionalProof proof;
       case same_head:
         SameHeadProof proof;
     };

     select (condition) {
       case true:
         BearerToken bearer_token;
         opaque pre_shared_key<Npsk>;
     }
   } TransparencyProof;

   The transparency_log_id field specifies the Transparency Log that the
   proof comes from.  The reference_ids field specifies the set of
   reference identifiers that the proof will cover, specified as a zero-
   indexed offset into the leaf certificate's subjectAltName extension.
   The proof_type field specifies the type of proof that follows.

   If any of the following conditions are true, then the bearer_token
   and pre_shared_key fields are present:

   1.  proof_type is set to provisional,

   2.  A provisional tree head type was advertised in the ClientHello
       for any Transparency Log other than that identified by
       transparency_log_id,

   3.  A provisional tree head type was advertised in the ClientHello
       for the Transparency Log identified by transparency_log_id and
       proof_type is set to same_head.

   Clients verify that the reference_ids field is sorted in ascending
   order, contains at least one entry, contains no duplicates, and that
   each index corresponds to a domain name or IP address in the leaf
   certificate's subjectAltName extension.  Clients MUST NOT trust a
   connection for any name other than those in reference_ids.

   Clients prepare a list, referred to as the *Current Authenticated
   Search Keys*, that contains the corresponding Prefix Tree search key
   for each reference identifier in reference_ids.  This list is de-
   duplicated and stored in ascending lexicographic order.  If the
   client advertised a provisional tree head type for the chosen
   Transparency Log, the client additionally prepares a list referred to
   as the *Past Authenticated Search Keys*. This list contains the union
   of every Current Authenticated Search Keys list from past connections
   where a provisional proof from the same Transparency Log was
   presented and the provisional proof has not yet been proven
   consistent with the *subsequent log entry* (defined as the first log
   entry sequenced after the provisional tree head was created).  This
   list is also de-duplicated and stored in ascending lexicographic
   order.

   Verification proceeds as follows, based on proof_type:

   When proof_type is set to standard, this indicates that the inclusion
   proof is against a log entry that is currently published by the
   Transparency Log but more recent than the client may be aware of.
   These proofs are verified as follows:

   1.  If the client advertised a standard tree head type, verify that
       tree_head.size is greater than the size advertised by the client.
       If the client advertised a provisional tree head type, verify
       that tree_head.size is greater than the size of the associated
       provisional tree head.

   2.  Verify combined as executing the following proofs in this order:

       1.  Updating the view of the tree (Section 10.3.1 of [KEYTRANS]).
           This also verifies that the rightmost log entry's timestamp
           is within the bounds set by max_ahead and max_behind.

       2.  The client requires a PrefixProof from the rightmost log
           entry for the Current Authenticated Search Keys.  If the
           client advertised a provisional tree head type for the chosen
           Transparency Log, the client additionally requires a
           PrefixProof from the subsequent log entry for the Past
           Authenticated Search Keys.

           If the rightmost log entry and the subsequent log entry are
           the same, then only one PrefixProof for the union of the two
           lists is provided in combined.  Otherwise, if needed, the
           subsequent log entry's timestamp and a PrefixProof from the
           subsequent log entry for the Past Authenticated Search Keys
           is provided.  This is followed by a second PrefixProof from
           the rightmost log entry for the Current Authenticated Search
           keys.

   3.  If the client advertised a provisional tree head type for the
       chosen Transparency Log, and the subsequent log entry is not the
       rightmost log entry, the client prepares a list referred to as
       the *Sequenced Search Keys*. This list is the intersection the
       Past Authenticated Search Keys and the Current Authenticated
       Search Keys lists, stored in lexicographic order.

       If this list is not empty, the sequencing field is expected to be
       present.  Each entry in the sequencing field corresponds to each
       entry in the Sequenced Search Keys list.  Each SequencingProof
       structure contains size of the Certificate Subtree for the given
       search key, and the first_valid and invalid_entries fields of its
       DomainCertificates structure, as it exists in the subsequent log
       entry.  Clients: 1.  Verify that SequencingProof.size is greater
       than or equal to the retained size of the Certificate Subtree. 2.
       Verify that SequencingProof.{first_valid, invalid_entries} would
       not unrevoke any previously revoked certificates.

   4.  Each entry in the subtree field corresponds to the union of the
       Current Authenticated Search Keys and Past Authenticated Search
       Keys lists, in lexicographic order.  Entries corresponding to
       search keys that are in the Current Authenticated Search Keys
       list contain the search key's state in the rightmost log entry.
       Entries corresponding to search keys that are *only* in the Past
       Authenticated Search Keys list contain the search key's state in
       the subsequent log entry.  For each entry in the subtree field:

       1.  If the corresponding search key is in the Sequenced Search
           Keys list, this means that there is an entry corresponding to
           the search key in sequencing.  Compared to the fields of that
           SequencingProof structure:

           1.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.size is greater than or
               equal.

           2.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid,
               invalid_entries} would not unrevoke any previously
               revoked certificates.

       2.  If the corresponding search key is in the Past Authenticated
           Search Keys list but not in the Current Authenticated Search
           Keys list:

           1.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.size is greater than or
               equal to the retained size of the Certificate Subtree.

           2.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid,
               invalid_entries} would not unrevoke any previously
               revoked certificates.

       3.  If the corresponding search key is in the Current
           Authenticated Search Keys list, verify that
           SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid, invalid_entries} do not
           exclude SubtreeInclusionProof.position.

   5.  Compute the root hash of the Log Tree and verify the signature in
       tree_head.signature:

       1.  For each entry in subtree, compute the root hash of the
           Certificate Subtree.  This is done by interpreting
           SubtreeInclusionProof.inclusion as an inclusion proof in the
           Certificate Subtree for SubtreeInclusionProof.position.  If
           the client advertised a provisional tree head and the
           corresponding search key is in the Past Authenticated Search
           Keys list, the proof will also function as a consistency
           proof as described in Section 3.2 of [KEYTRANS].

       2.  For each entry in sequencing, compute the root hash of the
           Certificate Subtree.  The inclusion proof in the subtree
           entry for the same search key will additionally contain the
           minimum set of node hashes necessary to compute the root of
           the Certificate Subtree at size SequencingProof.size.

       3.  With the root hashes of the Certificate Subtrees and the
           other fields in subtree and sequencing, compute the Prefix
           Tree leaf hash for each lookup that was done.  As mentioned
           earlier, each search key in the Current Authenticated Search
           Keys list is looked up in the rightmost log entry and each
           search key in the Past Authenticated Search Keys list is
           looked up in the subsequent log entry, deduplicating if these
           log entries are the same.

       4.  With the Prefix Tree leaf hashes, compute the root hash of
           the Log Tree with combined.  If the client advertised a
           provisional tree head, the inclusion proof in combined will
           also function as a consistency proof as described in
           Section 3.2 of [KEYTRANS].

   When proof_type is set to provisional, this indicates that the
   inclusion proof is against a log entry that is not yet published by
   the Transparency Log. These proofs are verified as follows:

   1.  If the client advertised a standard tree head type, verify that
       tree_head.size is greater than or equal to the size advertised by
       the client.  If the client advertised a provisional tree head
       type, verify that tree_head.size is greater than that of the
       advertised tree head, or that tree_head.size is equal and
       tree_head.counter is greater than that of the advertised tree
       head.

   2.  Verify combined as executing the following proofs in this order:

       1.  Updating the view of the tree (Section 10.3.1 of [KEYTRANS]).
           This also verifies that the rightmost log entry's timestamp
           is within the bounds set by max_ahead and max_behind.

       2.  If the client advertised a provisional tree head type for the
           chosen Transparency Log and the subsequent log entry exists,
           then the subsequent log entry's timestamp and a PrefixProof
           from it for the Past Authenticated Search Keys is added to
           combined.

   3.  If the client advertised a provisional tree head type for the
       chosen Transparency Log, and the subsequent log entry exists, the
       client prepares a list referred to as the *Sequenced Search
       Keys*. This list is the intersection the Past Authenticated
       Search Keys and the Current Authenticated Search Keys lists,
       stored in lexicographic order.

       If this list is not empty, the sequencing field is expected to be
       present.  Each entry in the sequencing field corresponds to each
       entry in the Sequenced Search Keys list.  Each SequencingProof
       structure contains size of the Certificate Subtree for the given
       search key, and the first_valid and invalid_entries fields of its
       DomainCertificates structure, as it exists in the subsequent log
       entry.  Clients: 1.  Verify that SequencingProof.size is greater
       than or equal to the retained size of the Certificate Subtree. 2.
       Verify that SequencingProof.{first_valid, invalid_entries} would
       not unrevoke any previously revoked certificates.

   4.  Each entry in the subtree field corresponds to the union of the
       Current Authenticated Search Keys list and, if the client
       advertised a provisional tree head and the subsequent log entry
       exists, the Past Authenticated Search Keys list.  Entries
       corresponding to search keys that are in the Current
       Authenticated Search Keys list contain the search key's state in
       the provisional Prefix Tree.  Entries corresponding to search
       keys that are *only* in the Past Authenticated Search Keys list
       contain the search key's state in the subsequent log entry.  For
       each entry in the subtree field:

       1.  If the corresponding search key is in the Sequenced Search
           Keys list, this means that there is an entry corresponding to
           the search key in sequencing.  Compared to the fields of that
           SequencingProof structure:

           1.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.size is greater than or
               equal.

           2.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid,
               invalid_entries} would not unrevoke any previously
               revoked certificates.

       2.  If the corresponding search key is in the Past Authenticated
           Search Keys list but not in the Current Authenticated Search
           Keys list:

           1.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.size is greater than or
               equal to the retained size of the Certificate Subtree.

           2.  Verify that SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid,
               invalid_entries} would not unrevoke any previously
               revoked certificates.

       3.  If the corresponding search key is in the Current
           Authenticated Search Keys list, verify that
           SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid, invalid_entries} do not
           exclude SubtreeInclusionProof.position.

   5.  Compute the root hash of the Log Tree, the root hash of the
       provisional Prefix Tree, and verify the signature in
       tree_head.signature:

       1.  For each entry in subtree, compute the root hash of the
           Certificate Subtree.  This is done by interpreting
           SubtreeInclusionProof.inclusion as an inclusion proof in the
           Certificate Subtree for SubtreeInclusionProof.position.  If
           the client advertised a provisional tree head and the
           corresponding search key is in the Past Authenticated Search
           Keys list, the proof will also function as a consistency
           proof as described in Section 3.2 of [KEYTRANS].

       2.  For each entry in sequencing, compute the root hash of the
           Certificate Subtree.  The inclusion proof in the subtree
           entry for the same search key will additionally contain the
           minimum set of node hashes necessary to compute the root of
           the Certificate Subtree at size SequencingProof.size.

       3.  With the root hashes of the Certificate Subtrees and the
           other fields in subtree and sequencing, compute the Prefix
           Tree leaf hash for each lookup that was done.  As mentioned
           earlier, each search key in the Current Authenticated Search
           Keys list is looked up in the provisional Prefix Tree and
           each search key in the Past Authenticated Search Keys list is
           looked up in the subsequent log entry if and only if it
           exists.

       4.  With the Prefix Tree leaf hashes, compute the root hash of
           the Log Tree with combined, and compute the root hash of the
           provisional Prefix Tree with the proof in prefix.  If the
           client advertised a provisional tree head, the inclusion
           proof in combined will also function as a consistency proof
           as described in Section 3.2 of [KEYTRANS].

   When proof_type is set to same_head, this indicates that the
   inclusion proof is against the same tree head that was specified in
   the SupportedTransparencyLog structure for the chosen Transparency
   Log. These proofs are verified as follows:

   1.  For the advertised tree head, verify that the rightmost log
       entry's timestamp is within the bounds set by max_ahead and
       max_behind.

   2.  Each entry in the subtree field corresponds to each entry of the
       Current Authenticated Search Keys list.  If the client advertised
       a standard tree head type, each entry contains the corresponding
       search key's state as it exists in the rightmost log entry.  If
       the client advertised a provisional tree head type, each entry
       contains the corresponding search key's state as it exists in the
       provisional Prefix Tree.

       For each entry in the subtree field, verify that
       SubtreeInclusionProof.{first_valid, invalid_entries} do not
       exclude SubtreeInclusionProof.position.

   3.  Compute the root hash of the Prefix Tree and verify that it
       matches the retained value:

       1.  For each entry in subtree, compute the root hash of the
           Certificate Subtree.  This is done by interpreting
           SubtreeInclusionProof.inclusion as an inclusion proof in the
           Certificate Subtree for SubtreeInclusionProof.position.  If
           the client advertised a provisional tree head and the
           corresponding search key is in the Past Authenticated Search
           Keys list, the proof will also function as a consistency
           proof as described in Section 3.2 of [KEYTRANS].

       2.  With the root hashes of the Certificate Subtrees and the
           other fields in subtree, compute the Prefix Tree leaf hash
           for each lookup that was done.

       3.  With the Prefix Tree leaf hashes, compute the root hash of
           the Prefix Tree with the proof in prefix.

   As was mentioned in Section 4, the entire certificate chain that will
   be presented by the server is stored in the leaf of the Certificate
   Subtree.  If the server presents a different certificate chain to the
   client than was logged in the Transparency Log (for example, by
   including or omitting intermediates), the client will be unable to
   compute the correct Certificate Subtree root hash and proof
   verification will fail.  Authenticating the entire certificate chain,
   instead of just the leaf, prevents the possibility of unlogged
   intermediate certificates.  That is, it prevents the possibility of a
   leaf certificate being logged with a chain to a testing (or otherwise
   untrusted) trust anchor, and then being presented in TLS connections
   with additional intermediates that connect it to a different trust
   anchor.

6.  Transparency Log Endpoints

   Transparency Logs are online services that maintain a tree data
   structure and provide access to it through the endpoints described
   below.  Generally, only Site Operators contact Transparency Logs.
   Site Operators regularly issue requests to the Transparency Log's
   endpoints to either obtain fresh inclusion proofs for their
   certificates or to monitor for mis-issuances affecting their
   properties.

   Endpoints are accessible over HTTP or HTTPS.  Which endpoint is being
   accessed is determined by the request's method and path.  Request and
   response bodies are specific structures, which are encoded according
   to TLS format and then base64 encoded.

6.1.  Get Tree

   Site Operators access this endpoint to initialize or update their
   view of the tree.

   GET /get-tree{?tree_size=X}

   struct {
     TreeHead tree_head;
     CombinedTreeProof combined;
   } GetTreeResponse;

   The request optionally contains a tree_size query parameter
   containing the size of the most recent tree head that has been
   observed by the client.  If present, tree_size MUST be the size of a
   tree head that was published less than or equal to max_behind
   milliseconds in the past.

   If the tree_size query parameter was provided but a more recent tree
   head than tree_size has not been issued, the Transparency Log MAY
   respond with a 204 No Content status code and an empty response body.
   Otherwise, the response body is GetTreeResponse.  The tree_head field
   contains the most recent tree head published by the Transparency Log.
   The combined field contains the following:

   *  The output of updating the view of the tree (from tree_size, if
      provided) to tree_head.tree_size (Section 10.3.1 of [KEYTRANS]).

   *  The timestamps of all log entries that have timestamps less than
      or equal to 10*max_behind, excluding those contained in tree_size.
      These timestamps are provided in left-to-right order.  Note that
      some of them may be omitted if they are duplicates with the
      previous bullet, as explained in Section 10.3 of [KEYTRANS].

   If tree_size is provided, the proof in combined.inclusion is
   additionally a consistency proof.

6.2.  Add Chain

   Site Operators access this endpoint to produce an inclusion proof for
   their certificate chain.  Transparency Logs SHOULD accept
   certificates issued by a broad set of the current widely-trusted
   Certificate Authorities.  This ensures that, if one Transparency Log
   has an outage, there are several other Transparency Logs that Site
   Operators can failover to and fetch fresh inclusion proofs from.

   POST /add-chain

   struct {
     uint64 tree_size;
     uint32 subtree_sizes<1..2^8-1>;

     uint8 reference_ids<1..2^8-1>;
     Certificate chain<1..2^8-1>;
     opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
   } AddChainRequest;

   struct {
     TreeHeadType tree_head_type;
     select (AddChainResponse.tree_head_type) {
       case provisional:
         ProvisionalTreeHead tree_head;
         CombinedTreeProof combined;
         PrefixProof prefix;
         SubtreeInclusionProof subtree<1..2^8-1>;
     }
     BearerToken bearer_token;
   } AddChainResponse;

   The request body is AddChainRequest.  The tree_size field contains
   the size of the most recent tree head observed by the client.  The
   subtree_sizes field contains the greatest size of the Certificate
   Subtree observed by the client for each reference identifier, in the
   order the reference identifiers are provided in reference_ids.  The
   reference_ids field contains the reference identifiers that the
   certificate chain will be validated against, identified by their
   zero-indexed offset into the leaf certificate's subjectAltName
   extension.  The chain field contains the certificate chain itself.
   The first entry in chain is assumed to be the leaf certificate and
   each subsequent certificate is assumed to authenticate the one prior,
   ending at a certificate which is authenticated by a trust anchor.
   The signature field contains a signature from the public key in the
   leaf certificate over the following:

   TODO Specify signature challenge

   The Transparency Log verifies that:

   1.  The tree_size field corresponds to a tree head that was issued
       less than or equal to max_behind milliseconds in the past.

   2.  The subtree_sizes field has the same length as the reference_ids
       field and each entry is less than or equal to the most recent
       size of the corresponding Certificate Subtree.

   3.  The reference_ids field is in ascending order, each entry
       corresponds to a domain name or IP address in the leaf
       certificate's subjectAltName extension, and each entry
       corresponds to a unique Prefix Tree search key.

   4.  The certificate chain in chain is valid.

   5.  The signature in signature is valid.

   The response body is AddChainResponse.  If tree_head_type is set to
   standard, this indicates that the exact certificate chain is already
   present in the Certificate Subtrees for all of the reference
   identifiers and published in the rightmost log entry.  If
   tree_head_type is set to provisional, this indicates that a
   provisional tree head has been issued for the chain.  The provisional
   tree head is given in tree_head and an inclusion proof in the
   provisional Prefix Tree for all requested reference identifiers is
   given in prefix.  The combined field contains the same contents as
   the Get Tree endpoint would.  The subtree field contains an inclusion
   proof in the Certificate Subtree for each reference identifier, in
   the order the reference identifiers are provided in reference_ids.
   If an entry of AddChainRequest.subtree_sizes is greater than zero,
   then the corresponding AddChainResponse.subtree[i].inclusion is
   additionally a consistency proof.

   The bearer_token field of an AddChainResponse is arbitrarily set by
   the Transparency Log and used to authenticate requests to the Refresh
   Proof endpoint.  The bearer token will stop working once the
   associated certificate chain has expired, regardless of revocation
   status.

6.3.  Refresh Proof

   Site Operators access this endpoint to refresh an inclusion proof for
   their certificate chain, making it acceptable to clients for a longer
   period of time.

   GET /refresh-proof?bearer_token=X&position=Y

   struct {
     PrefixProof prefix;
     SubtreeInclusionProof subtree<1..2^8-1>;
   } RefreshProofResponse;

   The request contains a bearer token obtained from the Add Chain
   endpoint in the bearer_token query parameter, and the position of a
   log entry in the position query parameter.  The bearer token is
   encoded with URL-safe base64, described in Section 5 of [RFC4648].
   The position query parameter MUST either be the subsequent log entry
   issued after the provisional tree head (if any) associated with
   bearer_token, or be a log entry issued less than or equal to
   max_behind milliseconds in the past.

   The response body is RefreshProofResponse.  The prefix field contains
   an inclusion proof from the Prefix Tree stored at the requested log
   entry, specifically for the reference identifiers associated with
   bearer_token.  The subtree field contains inclusion proofs for the
   certificate chain in the Certificate Subtree of each reference
   identifier associated with bearer_token, in the order the reference
   identifiers were provided.

6.4.  Issue Token

   Site Operators access this endpoint to obtain a bearer token to use
   when accessing the Transparency Log endpoints described in subsequent
   sections.

   POST /issue-token

   struct {
     Certificate chain<1..2^8-1>;
     opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
   } IssueTokenRequest;

   struct {
     BearerToken bearer_token;
   } IssueTokenResponse;

   The request body is IssueTokenRequest.  The chain field contains a
   certificate chain possessed by the client.  The first entry in chain
   is assumed to be the leaf certificate and each subsequent certificate
   is assumed to authenticate the one prior, ending at a certificate
   which is authenticated by a trust anchor.  The signature field
   contains a signature from the public key in the leaf certificate over
   the challenge specified in Section 6.2.

   The Transparency Log verifies the certificate chain and the signature
   challenge.  If verification is successful, the response body is
   IssueTokenResponse.  The bearer_token field is used to authenticate
   requests to the Transparency Log endpoints described below.  The
   bearer token will stop working once the associated certificate chain
   has expired, regardless of revocation status.

6.5.  Get Certificates

   Site Operators access this endpoint for the purpose of auditing
   certificates that have been issued for their domain names or IP
   addresses.

   GET /get-certificates?bearer_token=X&reference_id=Y{&start=Z}

   struct {
     select (start query parameter not present) {
       case true:
         uint32 first_valid;
         NodeValue full_subtrees<0..2^8-1>;
     }
     SubtreeLogLeaf leaves<0..2^8-1>;
   } GetCertificatesResponse;

   The bearer_token query parameter contains a bearer token obtained
   from the Issue Token endpoint encoded in URL-safe base64.  The
   reference_id query parameter may contain any domain name or IP
   address authenticated by the leaf certificate associated with the
   provided bearer token, or any domain name that is suffixed by any
   authenticated domain name.  The optional start query parameter
   contains the requested start position in the Certificate Subtree.

   Note that reference_id may be a domain name that is not authenticated
   by the certificate.  For example, a certificate that only
   authenticates example.com would not be accepted by TLS clients for
   sub.example.com.  However, sub.example.com would still be an
   acceptable input to this endpoint since it has the suffix
   .example.com.

   The response body is GetCertificatesResponse.  If the start query
   parameter is not present, the first_valid field contains the lowest
   value for first_valid in any DomainCertificates structure for the
   reference identifier that is currently published (meaning, excluding
   DomainCertificates structures in log entries that are past their
   maximum lifetime).  The full_subtrees field contains the full
   subtrees of the Certificate Subtree, in left-to-right order, up to
   but excluding the first_valid entry.

   The leaves field contains SubtreeLogLeaf structures in the same order
   that they were sequenced in the Certificate Subtree for the requested
   reference identifier, starting at position start or starting at
   position first_valid is start is not present.  If the start query
   parameter is present, it MUST be greater than first_valid.

6.6.  Get Subdomains

   Site Operators access this endpoint to learn about subdomains of
   domains they control that have logged certificates.

   GET /get-subdomains?bearer_token=W&reference_id=X&position=Y&start=Z

   struct {
     opaque search_key<0..2^8-1>;
     uint32 size;
     uint32 first_valid;
     uint32 invalid_entries<0..2^8-1>;
   } Subdomain;

   struct {
     PrefixProof prefix;
     Subdomain subdomains<0..2^8-1>;
   } GetSubdomainsResponse;

   The bearer_token query parameter contains a bearer token obtained
   from the Issue Token endpoint.  The reference_id query parameter may
   contain the zero-indexed offset of any domain name in the
   subjectAltName extension of the leaf certificate associated with the
   provided bearer token.  The position query parameter is the position
   of a log entry that has not passed its maximum lifetime.  The start
   query parameter contains the number of subdomains to skip in the
   endpoint's output.

   The response body is GetSubdomainsResponse.  Each entry of subdomains
   corresponds to a search key stored in the Prefix Tree that is
   prefixed with the search key corresponding to reference_id plus an
   additional dot.  The subdomains array is sorted by lexicographic
   order of the corresponding Prefix Tree search keys.  In each entry,
   the search_key field contains the Prefix Tree search key while the
   size, first_valid, and invalid_entries fields match the corresponding
   DomainCertificates structure for the search key as it exists in the
   log entry at position.

   If any search keys with the required prefix exist in the Prefix Tree
   in the log entry at position, the prefix field contains an inclusion
   proof for all the search keys returned in subdomains.  If no search
   keys with the required prefix exist, the prefix field contains a non-
   inclusion proof for the prefix.

   Clients rely on the structure of the Prefix Tree to authenticate
   whether or not all subdomains have been provided yet by the
   Transparency Log. Clients may need to make multiple requests to this
   endpoint, each time increasing the start query parameter to reflect
   subdomains already consumed, if the total number of subdomains
   exceeds a per-response limit.

6.7.  Add Revocation

   Site Operators or Certificate Authorities access this endpoint for
   the purpose of distributing revocations for their certificates.

   POST /add-revocation

   struct {
     Revocation revocation;
   } AddRevocationRequest;

   The request body is AddRevocationRequest.  There is no response body;
   an HTTP response status code of 204 indicates success, and a response
   status code in the 400-599 range indicates failure of the submission.
   The Transparency Log applies the revocation by updating any
   DomainCertificates structures to exclude chains that are affected by
   the revocation.  The revocation SHOULD be applied to all
   DomainCertificates structures within max_behind milliseconds.

   TODO define Revocation type

6.8.  Get Revocations

   Site Operators access this endpoint to audit revocations affecting
   their certificate chains.

   GET /get-revocations?bearer_token=X&reference_id=Y{&page=Z}

   struct {
     Revocation revocations<0..2^8-1>;
     optional<uint32> next;
   } GetRevocationsResponse;

   The bearer_token query parameter contains a bearer token obtained
   from the Issue Token endpoint.  The reference_id query parameter may
   contain the zero-indexed offset of any domain name or IP address in
   the subjectAltName extension of the leaf certificate associated with
   the provided bearer token.  An optional page number may be provided
   in the page query parameter.  The page parameter MUST be a value
   observed in the next field of a prior GetRevocationsResponse.

   The response body is GetRevocationsResponse.  The revocations field
   of the response contains Revocation structures corresponding one-to-
   one with the invalid_entries field of the most recent
   DomainCertificates structure in the Certificate Subtree for the
   requested reference identifier.  Note that the most recent
   DomainCertificates structure may only have been published in a
   provisional tree head at the time of the request.  If the last entry
   of revocations does not correspond to the last entry of
   invalid_entries, a page number in next is provided to allow the
   client to make a follow-up request for the next subset of
   revocations.  The Transparency Log MUST set next such that, if the
   invalid_entries field is modified while a client is requesting a
   series of pages, the client will not miss any revocations that
   existed as of the first request (with no page parameter) as a result.

7.  Extended Resolution Mechanisms

   When clients observe a provisional inclusion proof, they retain
   condensed state about the proof until they observe that the
   associated certificate chain was properly included in the subsequent
   log entry.  The primary mechanism by which clients are expected to
   observe this is through future connections to the same server.
   However, this may fail to happen for various reasons: the client may
   not wish to contact the server again within the allotted time, the
   server may go offline, or the server may simply decline to respond
   with a proof from the same Transparency Log. As such, additional
   mechanisms are described to enable the client to reach resolution on
   all provisional inclusion proofs it observes.

7.1.  Background Requests

   When a client has an unresolved provisional inclusion proof, where
   the rightmost log entry's timestamp is between 5*max_behind and
   10*max_behind milliseconds in the past, the client SHOULD attempt a
   single background request to the server that provided the proof.  A
   *background request* is a connection attempt that is not initiated by
   a user and will not carry user request data.  The client advertises
   in its ClientHello only provisional tree head types where the
   rightmost log entry has a timestamp more than max_behind milliseconds
   in the past.  If the connection succeeds, any certificate the server
   responds with will necessarily provide the information the client
   needs to purge a previously observed provisional inclusion proof from
   its state.  Any additional provisional inclusion proof provided by
   the server in such a connection SHOULD be disregarded.

7.2.  Oblivious Third Party

   If provided, clients may attempt to contact a third-party service,
   potentially operated by their software vendor, to request proof that
   a subsequent log entry is constructed correctly.  Such an endpoint
   could be contacted over Oblivious HTTP [RFC9458] to preserve the
   client's privacy.

7.3.  Final Reporting

   If a client has been unable to resolve a provisional inclusion proof
   on its own, and the rightmost log entry's timestamp is more than
   10*max_behind milliseconds in the past, the client MUST report the
   provisional inclusion proof to a party distinct from the issuing
   Certificate Authority and the operator of the Transparency Log. After
   this, the client MAY delete the associated state.

   The purpose of reporting provisional inclusion proofs that are unable
   to be resolved is to ensure that there is broader ecosystem awareness
   of a potential issue with the Transparency Log. The extent to which
   there was any malicious behavior or operational errors, and any
   corrective action to be taken, would need to be decided out-of-band.

8.  Operational Considerations

8.1.  Client State

   Clients retain the following state:

   *  For each fork of each trusted Transparency Log:

      -  The timestamp and Prefix Tree root hash for any observed log
         entries that may be useful to advertise in the client's
         ClientHello:

         o  All observed log entries with a timestamp less than or equal
            to max_behind milliseconds in the past.

         o  The rightmost observed log entry with a timestamp more than
            max_behind milliseconds in the past.

      -  Any intermediate Log Tree nodes that are necessary to compute
         the most recent Log Tree root hash from the retained log
         entries.

   *  For each provisional inclusion proof observed that has not been
      replaced with a superseding provisional inclusion proof, or been
      shown to be included in the subsequent log entry:

      -  The domain or IP address of the host that presented the
         provisional proof.

      -  The ProvisionalTreeHead structure.

      -  The full subtrees of the Log Tree, as presented in the
         provisional proof.

      -  The authenticated reference identifiers

      -  The size, first_valid, and invalid_entries fields of each
         SubtreeInclusionProof structure.

      -  The full subtrees of each Certificate Subtree.

      -  The bearer token and pre-shared key associated with the
         provisional inclusion proof.

   Clients MUST only update their stored state once a proof has been
   fully and successfully verified.  In addition, clients MUST be able
   to handle being shown forked views of a Transparency Log.

   When a client advertises a provisional tree head to the server and
   the server responds with a standard proof type, the server's response
   will necessarily include proof that the certificate in the
   provisional tree head was correctly included in the subsequent log
   entry.  As such, the information retained about the provisional
   inclusion proof is deleted.  Similarly, when a client advertises a
   provisional tree head to the server and the server responds with a
   provisional proof type, the server's response will contain proof that
   the new provisional inclusion proof supersedes (i.e., contains all
   the same certificates as) the previous one.  As such, state for the
   previous provisional inclusion proof is deleted and replaced with
   state for the new one.

   Regardless of whether the server responds with a standard or
   provisional proof type, if the server presents a new view of the Log
   Tree that the client was previously unaware of, the client retains
   this new view for later use.  If possible, the client stores the new
   view as an extension of a previously-observed view of the
   Transparency Log. However, if the view is inconsistent with what the
   client has previously observed, then it is stored as a new
   independent fork.

8.2.  Server Behavior

   To prevent connection failure, it's critical that servers that
   implement the TLS extension in Section 5 always have satisfactory
   proof to offer to clients.  Servers MUST implement the automatic
   refreshing of proofs and MUST implement automatic failover between
   multiple trusted Transparency Logs in the event that one is
   temporarily unavailable.

   Along this same line, it's also possible for a Transparency Log to
   sequence incorrect information and no longer be able to provide
   acceptable proofs.  This can happen, for example, if a Transparency
   Log issues a provisional inclusion proof for a certificate and then
   neglects to include the certificate in the subsequent log entry.
   This is functionally equivalent to a prolonged outage, as the server
   is unable to obtain an acceptable inclusion proof for its
   certificate.  As such, servers MUST verify proofs in the same manner
   as clients and avoid serving proofs that fail verification, failing
   over to another Transparency Log if necessary to get an acceptable
   proof.

   Given the substantial load that may be placed on Transparency Logs,
   especially in scenarios where one log's traffic is failing over to
   others, servers have a responsibility to minimize their individual
   impact on logs.  Servers SHOULD NOT attempt to refresh an inclusion
   proof from a Transparency Log until the rightmost log entry's
   timestamp in the current inclusion proof is more than max_behind*3/4
   milliseconds in the past.  Servers SHOULD NOT contact a Transparency
   Log about the same inclusion proof more than 3 times within
   max_behind milliseconds.

   Finally, servers MUST generate the bearer tokens that are provided to
   clients in a way that, when the bearer token is advertised back to
   the server, does not degrade the client's privacy.  One suggested way
   to do this would be to make the bearer token a symmetric encryption
   of an identifier for the associated provisional certificate along
   with a 12- or 16-byte random value.  The random value would then be
   used to compute the pre-shared key to give the client.  When the
   client later advertises the bearer token back, it can be decrypted by
   the server to identify the provisional certificate to respond with
   and to re-compute the pre-shared key for the connection.  This
   minimizes the server operational burden and also effectively
   preserves client privacy.

8.3.  Handling Forks

   There are several long-term expectations placed on Transparency Logs
   that, in practice, will almost certainly fail to be upheld.  In
   particular, Transparency Logs are generally expected to be append-
   only, meaning that log entries are never removed once they've been
   added.  However, enforcing this strictly is incompatible with many of
   the standard best-practices for operating reliable software systems.
   For example, if this property needed to be enforced strictly, it
   would be pointless to back up such a Transparency Log. Restoring from
   backup would imply some degree of rollback and this would be
   unacceptable.  As such, it is necessary for the protocol to handle
   reasonable violations of these expectations gracefully, and in a way
   that preserves overall security.

   As discussed in Section 8.1, clients MUST be able to handle forked
   views of a Transparency Log gracefully.  When a client becomes aware
   of a fork, it MUST report the fork to a party distinct from the
   issuing Certificate Authority and the operator of the Transparency
   Log. Going forward, as long as the client is aware of multiple forks
   where the timestamps of the rightmost log entries differ by less than
   max_behind milliseconds, the client MUST NOT advertise in its
   ClientHello a standard tree head type with a tree size past where any
   such fork occurs.  This minimizes the risk of connection failure when
   connecting to servers that have inclusion proofs from different
   forks.

   If a client advertised a non-zero standard tree head type and proof
   verification failed only at the final signature verification step (or
   at direct comparison of the Prefix Tree root hash, in the case of
   SameHeadProof), this may indicate that there is a fork the client is
   unaware of.  The client MAY attempt to reconnect to the server while
   advertising a zero standard tree head type.  This will prompt the
   server to provide additional intermediate nodes, allowing the client
   to compute the correct Log Tree root hash for signature verification
   to succeed.

   Excluding the production of forks, the other ways that a Transparency
   Log can fail are much simpler to handle because we know that the
   client and server agree on the state of the log.  These cases are
   handled by the provisions of Section 8.2.

9.  Certificate Authority

9.1.  Poison Extension

   A trivial downgrade attack is possible where a host refuses to
   acknowledge the presence of the "transparency_revocation" TLS
   extension in an attempt to circumvent the stronger transparency or
   non-revocation requirements.  Customers of a Certificate Authority
   can mitigate such an attack by including a special non-critical
   poison extension (OID TODO, whose extnValue OCTET STRING contains
   ASN.1 NULL data (0x05 0x00)) in all certificates they issue.

   Clients that advertise the "transparency_revocation" extension in
   their ClientHello MUST reject a certificate that contains the
   extension if it is not provided with an appropriate inclusion proof.

10.  Performance Considerations

   This section contains brief a analysis of the performance impacts of
   the system.

10.1.  Transparency Log

   *Storage.* The storage of a Transparency Log is long-term bounded
   (i.e., Transparency Logs will not grow infinitely) and is dominated
   by the cost of storing _unexpired_ certificate chains.  Certificate
   chains can be purged once they have expired and are at the leftmost
   edge of the Certificate Subtree.  Any associated revocations can be
   purged once the associated certificate chains have been.  Subtrees of
   the Log Tree and Prefix Tree may be purged once they are no longer
   necessary to the protocol.  For specific leaves of the Log Tree, this
   occurs once they are older than maximum_lifetime milliseconds.  For
   subtrees of the Prefix Tree, this occurs once all certificate chains
   stored in the subtree have expired.

   *Bandwidth.* A TLS server maintaining a valid inclusion proof for a
   single certificate chain is expected to make the following requests
   to a Transparency Log:

   1.  When a new certificate chain is first issued, the server will
       initialize its state (a Get Tree request) and submit the chain to
       receive a provisional inclusion proof (an Add Chain request).

   2.  From then on, the server will regularly obtain the most recent
       tree head (a Get Tree request with the tree_size parameter
       provided) and refresh its inclusion proof (a Refresh Proof
       request).

   The table below provides formulas for the size in bytes of the
   Transparency Log's response to each query.  Each variable in the
   formulas is also given a "typical" value which is used to estimate
   the total bandwidth commitment of a Transparency Log.

   *S*  The size of one cryptographic signature in bytes.  For the
      purpose of computing an estimate, S is assumed to be 64 bytes as
      this is the size of a typical elliptic curve signature.

   *N*  The height of the Log Tree.  Based on a Transparency Log that
      sequences two new log entries per day, and that has been operating
      for 365 days, N is estimated to be 11.

   *P*  The average height of the Prefix Tree.  Based on a Transparency
      Log that stores 300 million unique identifiers, P is estimated to
      be 30.

   *M*  The average height of a Certificate Subtree.  Based on an
      assumption that a typical Site Operator will issue several hundred
      certificates, M is estimated to be 10.

   +========================+================+================+=======+
   | Response Type          | Formula        | Estimated Size | Count |
   +========================+================+================+=======+
   | GetTreeResponse (full) | 694 + S + 52*N | 1330           | 1     |
   +------------------------+----------------+----------------+-------+
   | GetTreeResponse        | 54 + S         | 118            | 179   |
   | (abridged)             |                |                |       |
   +------------------------+----------------+----------------+-------+
   | AddChainResponse       | 51 + S + 32_P  | 1395           | 1     |
   |                        | + 32_M         |                |       |
   +------------------------+----------------+----------------+-------+
   | RefreshProofResponse   | 15 + 32*P      | 975            | 179   |
   +------------------------+----------------+----------------+-------+

                                 Table 1

   The "Count" column of the table contains the number of times each
   response will be served to a client, assuming a certificate lifetime
   of 3 months and that the server refreshes its proof twice every day
   and a half.  As such, it's estimated that supporting a single Site
   Operator requires an outbound bandwidth commitment from a
   Transparency Log of approximately 0.2 bits per second.

10.2.  TLS Server

   One particularly salient concern about the future of the [RFC6962]
   ecosystem is that it requires a multitude of signatures from
   different co-signers and this may not translate well to a world where
   those signatures are required to come from post-quantum signature
   schemes.  Post-quantum signature schemes produce signatures that are
   substantially larger than classical ones, and transmitting a
   significant number of them in the TLS handshake will degrade
   performance.

   The appeal of the system described in this document is that it
   replaces up to three signatures (two from distinct Certificate
   Transparency logs and one from an OCSP staple) with either one or
   zero signatures.

   In the TLS extension described in Section 5, the most common response
   one would expect in the TLS server's Certificate message is a
   SameHeadProof.  This is because clients make an effort to advertise
   the specific version of the Transparency Log that the server can
   provide a proof for without also transmitting a signature.

   Using the variables from the previous subsection, the size in bytes
   of a SameHeadProof is 15 + 32*P + 32*M, which would then be estimated
   at 1295 bytes in a typical deployment.  Compared to transmitting
   three ML-DSA-44 signatures, which would add to 7680 bytes, this is an
   83% reduction.

11.  Security Considerations

11.1.  ClientHello Extension

   Given that ClientHello extensions are sent unencrypted, this portion
   of the extension was designed to avoid unnecessary privacy leaks.  In
   particular, care was taken to avoid leaking what certificate(s) the
   client may have been shown in previous connections and what other
   hosts the client may have contacted recently.

   Clients advertise a recently observed tree size for each Transparency
   Log that they support receiving inclusion proofs from.  Since clients
   will generally only "observe" various tree sizes of a Transparency
   Log by communicating with hosts that provide proofs from that
   Transparency Log, and since different hosts will update their proofs
   at different times, this may cause a privacy leak.  Specifically, it
   could happen that a client communicates with a host that uses proofs
   from a very recently-created tree size.  If the client advertised
   this very recently-created tree size to other hosts, it would reveal
   who they previously communicated with.

   To mitigate this, clients only advertise tree sizes where the
   timestamp of the rightmost log entry is sufficiently old.  This time
   delay ensures that the inclusion proof provided by almost any host
   could've conveyed the same tree size, creating a large anonymity set.

   When a client observes a provisional inclusion proof from a host,
   they retain condensed information about it to allow them to later
   verify that the information it contained was properly integrated into
   the Transparency Log. The primary avenue for obtaining this
   verification is advertising knowledge of the provisional proof back
   to the host that it came from, hoping to get the necessary
   information in-band.

   Since provisional inclusion proofs must be issued quickly, they don't
   have time to build up a large anonymity set with other hosts.
   Instead of having clients advertise knowledge of a specific
   provisional proof in their ClientHello, they instead use a bearer
   token that was provided by the host.  These bearer tokens are
   provided in the encrypted Certificate message whenever a provisional
   proof is shown by the host.  Similarly, when the bearer token is
   redeemed (i.e., when the host shows that the provisional proof was
   correctly integrated into the Transparency Log), this information is
   provided in the encrypted Certificate message.  As such, if the host
   generates the bearer token in a secure way, a passive network
   observer never sees anything that would identify the certificate
   shown to the client.

   Each bearer token is additionally associated with a pre-shared key
   which is provided to the TLS key schedule.  This prevents an active
   attacker from establishing a TLS connection to the host, advertising
   an observed bearer token, and learning which certificate is provided.

   Finally, note that it is not a goal to prevent an attacker from
   learning whether a client has previously contacted a host _at all_
   before.  The protocol explicitly relies on the client's stored state
   to remain secure while sending minimal data over the wire.  A passive
   observer of network traffic could trivially determine from the size
   of the encrypted portion of the handshake messages whether such state
   was present or not, and therefore whether the host had been contacted
   before.  Similarly, it is not a goal to prevent a host from
   identifying the same client over many connections.

11.2.  Downgrade Prevention

   The stronger transparency and non-revocation guarantees this protocol
   provides would be irrelevant if a malicious actor could cause the TLS
   client to disable them at-will.  An attacker may have, for example, a
   revoked certificate to which they know the private key.  This would
   allow them to fully intercept a client's connection to a host and
   attempt to impersonate the host.  In a downgraded version of TLS, the
   client may not enforce revocation at all and therefore the attacker's
   interception would succeed.

   Site Operators that have deployed this protocol and wish to prevent
   capable TLS clients from being downgraded can include a poison
   extension in their TLS certificates, as described in Section 9.1.
   The poison extension will be silently ignored by TLS clients that
   genuinely do not support it, but will cause updated clients to abort
   the protocol in downgrade scenarios.

   Site Operators can monitor the existing [RFC6962] ecosystem to detect
   any certificates that have been issued without the poison extension,
   potentially permitting downgrades.  However, the creation of such a
   certificate without the Site Operator's consent would imply mis-
   issuance by a Certificate Authority rather than abuse of a
   compromised/revoked certificate.

12.  IANA Considerations

   *  Codepoint for TLS extension "transparency_revocation"

   *  Registry for transparency_log_id(?)

   *  OID for poison extension

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [KEYTRANS] McMillion, B. and F. Linker, "Key Transparency Protocol",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-keytrans-
              protocol-01, 4 June 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-
              keytrans-protocol-01>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, DOI 10.17487/RFC4291, February
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4291>.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, DOI 10.17487/RFC4648, October 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

13.2.  Informative References

   [AppleKT]  Apple, "Advancing iMessage security: iMessage Contact Key
              Verification", 27 October 2023,
              <https://security.apple.com/blog/imessage-contact-key-
              verification/>.

   [CertLifetimes]
              "SC-081v3: Introduce Schedule of Reducing Validity and
              Data Reuse Periods", n.d.,
              <https://groups.google.com/a/groups.cabforum.org/g/
              servercert-wg/c/bvWh5RN6tYI>.

   [Clubcards]
              Schanck, J. M. and Mozilla, "Clubcards for the WebPKI:
              smaller certificate revocation tests in theory and
              practice", 1 April 2025,
              <https://research.mozilla.org/files/2025/04/
              clubcards_for_the_webpki.pdf>.

   [CRLite]   Jones, J.C. and Mozilla, "Introducing CRLite: All of the
              Web PKIs revocations, compressed", 9 January 2020,
              <https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2020/01/09/crlite-part-
              1-all-web-pki-revocations-compressed/>.

   [CRLSets]  "Chromium Security > CRLSets", n.d.,
              <https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/
              crlsets/>.

   [KeyTransWG]
              "Key Transparency (keytrans) Working Group", n.d.,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/keytrans/about/>.

   [MetaKT]   Meta, "Deploying key transparency at WhatsApp", 13 April
              2023, <https://engineering.fb.com/2023/04/13/security/
              whatsapp-key-transparency/>.

   [ProtonKT] Proton, "What is Key Transparency?", n.d.,
              <https://proton.me/support/key-transparency>.

   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6962>.

   [RFC7633]  Hallam-Baker, P., "X.509v3 Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Feature Extension", RFC 7633, DOI 10.17487/RFC7633,
              October 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7633>.

   [RFC9458]  Thomson, M. and C. A. Wood, "Oblivious HTTP", RFC 9458,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9458, January 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Brendan McMillion
   Email: brendanmcmillion@gmail.com


   Devon O'Brien
   Google LLC
   Email: asymmetric@google.com


   Dennis Jackson
   Mozilla
   Email: ietf@dennis-jackson.uk
